[Music]
hello good morning welcome to breakfast
with rachel burden
and roger johnson our headlines today
health bosses message to the over 50s
book a coronavirus vaccination before
supplies become limited next month
it's never too late it's an evergreen
offer if you've decided now actually
i'm ready for my vaccination you will
absolutely be able to get it
as england prepares for lockdown changes
on monday the head of the nhs warns the
public
not to squander the gains made against
kovid in recent months
high tide fails to dislodge the giant
container ship blocking the suez canal
in egypt good morning the world cup
qualifiers continue scotland take on
israel while
england face albania later looking to
make it two wins from two
iceland's hottest attraction how an
erupting volcano has become a popular
alternative to cinemas and theaters
hello there good morning it's a windy
warmer day today but we've got some rain
moving its way northwards now
next week you're going to need a pair of
shorts and a warm coat
and i'll explain why later on
[Music]
good morning thank you for being with us
sunday the 28th of march and don't
forget the clocks have gone forward an
hour so it is a minute past six o'clock
and our top story this morning
the nhs in england is urging the over
50s to book a coronavirus vaccination
before an expected shortage of supply
next month
a quarter of those aged between 50 and
54 haven't been vaccinated the nhs will
concentrate
on delivering second doses in april
meaning that there will be fewer first
appointments available
as charlotte wright reports this
is progress every needle in each arm
one step further in the fight against
coronavirus
and today a new milestone for england
this is wonderful so we have now
protected 2.5 million people
with their second days on a background
of over 25 million people in england
having had their first day so it's
really quite phenomenal numbers
and we will keep going across the uk as
a whole the first dose has been
administered to more than 29 million
people
the government says it's on track to
reach all nine priority groups by the
15th of april
but as the uk rollout steams ahead a
group of health and development
organizations have written to the prime
minister
urging him to help other countries the
groups including the research foundation
welcome
and the charity save the children say
such is the success of the uk's vaccine
strategy
that even after the entire population
has been given both doses of the vaccine
britain could potentially have an excess
of more than 100 million doses in
advance
orders putting it in a strong position
to support global vaccination efforts
the government says it will share the
majority of any future surplus supply
when available
we're not quite there yet though the uk
is first expected to see a reduction in
supply next month
following the need to retest a batch and
a delay in the arrival of some imports
from
india so for now the nhs is urging
anyone aged 50 to 69
who hasn't yet booked in their first jab
to take up the offer
as soon as they can charlotte wright bbc
news
people should not squander the gains
made against coronavirus in recent
months that is a warning from the head
of nhs england yes professor stephen
powers said enormous progress had been
made but it does not mean that the job
is done
he made the comments ahead of lockdown
restrictions in england easing tomorrow
allowing groups of six or two households
to meet outside
and in private gardens the stay at home
rule is also
ending our reporter simon jones uh joins
us now so simon just give us some more
details about what the warnings are
specifically from stephen powers here
yes this warning is important because it
comes from the medical director at
nhs england who has been at the
forefront of fighting coronavirus
now it's a big day in england tomorrow
because the stay at home rule officially
comes to an end we're still being urged
not to make unnecessary journeys
and stay local but you will be allowed
to meet outside in a group
of up to six people or two households
and that can be in a private garden
and on top of that outdoor sporting
facilities will reopen
but professor stephen powers says that
the virus
isn't defeated yet we have made great
gains over the past year thanks
a large part due to the vaccination
program but he says we mustn't squander
what we have achieved yet
and the virus still has power to reek
cause chaos as well and i think he's
speaking out because what he's trying to
say to people is we mustn't go
too quickly down the route out of
lockdown
now making this message is really an
appeal to people
to be sensible now as well as this we've
also got lockdown restrictions already
being eased in wales yesterday people in
wales were told they could
travel in the country which he hadn't
been able to do before
in scotland on good friday the
stay-at-home message becomes stay local
and in northern ireland restrictions are
being eased on the 12th of
april but the message very much from
this man at the nhs is we must be
careful and we must be cautious
thank you very much simon wales has
become the first
uk nation to lift travel restrictions
within its borders the state local rule
which has been in place since december
has been scrapped in favor of unlimited
travel within wales and groups of six
people from two households can meet up
outdoors and
in private gardens i feel like a free
bird
it's lovely yeah it's really nice to get
that bit of normality
again you know and just to be able to go
out and
just do things that we were used to
doing really
it's just nice to actually get out of
the local area and
smell the sierra yeah
it's been a long few months of luck
dance i'm glad to get here so we got
here our past six this morning
and we went up the peg routes and come
down the miners riggers
really good really windy up there though
i'm cold
a second mp has defected from the
scottish national party
to join the new pro-independence group
being set up by alex salmond
neil hanvey mp for cacaldi and calden
beath
will join the alba party which is set to
contest the scottish parliamentary
elections in may
yesterday the former scottish justice
secretary kenny mccaskill
announced he would stand as a candidate
for the newly established
party more than 100 people were killed
by myanmar
security forces yesterday making it the
deadliest day of protesting
since the ruling military's coup last
month the actions have been widely
content
condemned by both the u.s secretary of
state anthony blinken
who said that washington is horrified
and the uk foreign secretary dominic
robb who called the violence
a new low
there were fresh efforts yesterday to
refloat that giant container ship
blocking the suez canal one of the
world's busiest waterways
more than 300 ships are stuck on either
side of the vessel which became stranded
on
tuesday as our correspondent sally nabil
reports
the operation to refloat the giant
container ship
blocking one of the world's busiest
waterways
continues in egypt's red sea
tuck boats and treachers have been
operating here around the clock to try
and dislodge this giant ship that has
been blocking the surveys canal for the
past
few days we understand that huge amounts
of sand have been removed
to make room for the ship to move
congestion
continues to pile up in this strategic
waterway
and the longer this trip is stuck here
the more disruption there will be
to global trade a vast traffic jam
continues to build with more than 300
ships stuck on either side of the vessel
which is holding up seven billion pounds
worth of goods each day
strong wind had been given as the reason
for the
grounding of the ever given officials
suggested
other factors could have been to blame
there could be a lot of mistakes but we
can't say what they are now
the only mistake we can be sure of now
is the wind and the sandstorm
this is not the main one like i said but
the rest will become clearer in the
investigation
the ship's managers said initial
investigations suggested
strong winds led to its grounding
more tugboats will arrive on sunday to
help
with all efforts focused on freeing up
the canal
as soon as possible celine nabil bbc
news
suez a number of drivers for the meal
delivery company deliveroo are planning
to go on strike
to protest against the way that they are
employed it comes as the company
prepares to float on the london stock
exchange our business correspondent
katie prescott reports
a business cooked up in the uk making
takeaway meals accessible
around the world deliveroo is a
home-grown success story
its launch on the london stock market is
a huge event
but this is being overshadowed by
criticism of how the company employs its
delivery drivers
as independent contractors not entitled
to benefits or the minimum wage
some investors say that's putting them
off delivery has
contractors rather than employees and as
with the
uber ruling there is a significant
chance that
in due course people who bicycle for
delivery
as contractors will be given the rights
of employees
and therefore this will impact the
long-term profitability of delivery
so pressure on the company about this
employment model is mounting
as others such as uber make their
drivers officially workers
entitled to benefits delivery drivers
from one union plan to go on strike over
the issue
you think business is booming you think
these guys would have been getting more
money as
people are starting to rely more and
more on deliver deliveries to their
homes but
what they've actually seen for the
careers working out there
is over hiring money going down
conditions getting worse
but these strikers make up a tiny
fraction of the workforce
and deliveroo says delivery riders have
the complete freedom to choose when
and where to work fifty thousand riders
choose to work with deliveroo
and thousands more people apply to work
with us every week
our way of working is designed around
what riders tell us matters to them most
flexibility as delivery gears up for its
share sale
it's not yet clear whether this issue
will affect demand
katie prescott bbc news
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news